<!-- markdownlint-disable MD013 -->
# Transition from the ordinary rational knowledge of morality to the philosophical
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD013 -->

A *good will* is the only unconditionally *good thing* in the world. A will
influences all talents, qualities of temperament, and gifts of fortune. A
*good will* is the only correcting power in this world for truly making
something *good*, such that success in the absence of a *good will* is
inherently off-putting.

> There is no possibility of thinking of anything at all in the world, or even
out of it, which can be regarded as good without qualifcation, except a
*good will*. Intelligence, wit, judgment, and whatever talents of the mind one
might want to name are doubtless in many respects good and desirable, as are
such qualities of temperament as courage, resolution, perseverance. But they
can also become extremely bad and harmful if the will, which is to make use of
these gifts of nature and which in its special constitution is called
character, is not good. The same holds with gifts of fortune; power, riches,
honor, even health, and that complete well-being and contentment with one's
condition which is called happiness make for pride and often hereby even
arrogance, unless there is a good will to correct their influence on the mind
and herewith also to rectify the whole principle of action and make it
universally conformable to its end. The sight of a being who is not graced by
any touch of a pure and good will but who yet enjoys an uninterrupted
prosperity can never delight a rational and impartial spectator. Thus a good
will seems to constitute the indispensable condition of being even worthy of
happiness.

Analysis placeholder

> Some qualities are even conducive to this good will itself and can facilitate
its work. Nevertheless, they have no intrinsic unconditional worth; but they
always pressupose, rather, a good will, which restricts the high esteem in
which they are otherwise rightly held, and does not permit them to be regarded
as absolutely good. Moderation in emotions and passions, self-control, and calm
deliberation are not only good in many respects but even seem to constitute
part of the intrinsic worth of a person. But they are far from being rightly
called good without qualification (however unconditionally they were commended
by the ancients). For without the principles of a good will, they can become
extremely bad; the coolness of a villain makes him not only much more dangerous
but also immediately more abominable in our eyes than he would have been
regarded by us without it.

Analysis placeholder

> A good will is good not because of what it effects or accomplishes, nor
because of its fitness to attain some proposed end; it is good only through its
willing, i.e., it is good in itself. When it is considered in itself, then it
is to be esteemed very much higher than anything which it might ever bring
about merely in order to favor some inclination, or even the sum total of all
inclinations. Even if, by some especially unfortunate fate or by the niggardly
provision of stepmotherly nature, this will should be wholly lacking in the
power to accomplish its purpose; if with the greatest effort it should yet
achieve nothing, and only the good will should remain (not, to be sure, as a
mere wish but as the summoning of all the means in our power), yet would it,
like a jewel, still shine by its own light as something which has its full
value in itself. Its usefulness or fruitlessness can neighter augment nor
diminish this value. Its usefulness would be, as it were, only the setting to
enable us to handle it in ordinary dealings or to attract to it the attention
of those who are not experts, but not to recommend it to real experts or to
determine its value.

Analysis placeholder

> But there is something so strange in this idea of the absolute value of a
mere will, in which no account is taken of any useful results, that in spite of
all the agreement received even from ordinary reason, yet there must arise the
suspicion that such an idea may perhaps have as its hidden basis merely some
high-flown fancy, and that we may have misunderstood the purpose of nature in
assigning to reason the governing of our will. Therefore, this ideal will be
examined from this point of view.

Analysis placeholder

> In the natural constitution of an organized being, i.e., one suitably adapted
to the purpose of life, let us take as a principle that in such a being no
organ is to be found for any end unless it be the most fit and the best adapted
for that end. Now if that being's preservation, welfare, or in a word its
happiness, were the real end of nature in the case of a being having reason
and will, the nnature would have hit upon a very poor arrangement in having the
reason of the creature carry out this purpose. For all the actions which such a
creature has to perform with this purpose in view, and the whole rule of his
conduct would have been prescribed much more exactly by instinct; and the
purpose in question could have been attained much more certainly by instinct
than it ever can be by reason. And if in addition reason had been imparted to
this favored creature, then it would have had to serve him only to contemplate
the happy constitution of his nature, to admire that nature, to rejoice in it,
and to feel grateful to the cause that bestowed it; but reason would not have
served him to subject his faculty of desire to its weak and delusive guidance
nor would it have served him to meddle incompetently with the purpose of
nature. In a word, nature would have taken care that reason did not strike out
for itself a plan for happiness and the means for attaining it. Nature would
have taken upon herself not only the choice of ends but also that of the means,
and would with wise foresight have entrusted both to instinct alone.

Analysis placeholder

> And, in fact, we find that the more a cultivated reason devotes itself to the
aim of enjoying life and happiness, the further does man get away from true
contentment. Because of this there arises in many persons, if only they are
candid enough to admit it, a certain degree of misology, i.e., hatred of
reason. This is especially so in the case of those who are the most experienced
in the use of reason, because after calculating all the advantages they derive,
I say not from the invention of all the arts of common luxury, but even from
the sciences (which in the end seem to them to be also a luxury of the
understanding), they yetr find that they have in fact only brought more trouble
on their heads than they have gained in happiness. Therefore, they come to
envy, rather than despise, the more common run of men who are closer to the
guidance of mere natural instinct and who do not allow their reason much
influence on their conduct. And we must admit that the judgment of those who
would temper, or even reduce below zero, the boastful eulogies on behalf of the
advantages which reason is supposed to provide as regards the happiness and
contentment of life is by no means morose or ungrateful to the goodness with
which the world is governed. There lies at the root of such judgments, rather,
the idea that existence has another and much more worthy purpose, for which,
and not for happiness, reason is quite properly intended, and which must,
therefore be regarded as the supreme condition to which the private purpose of
men must, for the most part, defer.